[Music]
if you haven't ordered yet I generally
find the rigatoni with the spicy tomato
sauce goes best with diseases of the
small intestine so sorry I just feels
like I should be doing stand-up up here
because of this setting no I what I want
to do is is take you back to 1854 in
London for the next few minutes and and
tell the story in brief of this of this
outbreak which in many ways I think
helped create the world that we live in
today and particularly the kind of city
that we live in today
this period in 1854 in in the you know
middle part of the 19th century in
London's history is incredibly
interesting for a number of reasons but
I think the most important one is that
London was a city of two and a half
million people and it was the largest
city that had that on the face of the
planet at that point but it was also the
largest city that had ever been built
and so the Victorians were trying to
kind of live through and and
simultaneously invent a whole new scale
of living the scale living that we you
know now call metropolitan living and it
was in many ways at this point in the
mid 1850s a complete disaster they were
basically a city living with the modern
kind of industrial metropolis with in
Elizabethan public infrastructure so
people for instance just to gross you
out for a second had had cesspools of
human waste in their basement like a
foot to two feet deep and they would
just kind of throw the buckets down
there and hope that it would somehow go
away and of course it never really would
go away and all of this stuff basically
had accumulated to the point where the
city was incredibly offensive to just
walk around and it was an amazingly
smelly City
not just because of the cesspools but
also the sheer number of livestock in
the city would shot people not just the
horses but people had cows in their
attics that they would use for milk that
they would kind of hoist up there and
keep them in the Attic until until
literally their milk went out and they
died and then they would kind of drag
them off to the bull you know the bone
boilers down the street so you would
just walk around London at this point
and just be overwhelmed with this book
with this stench and what ended up
happening is that an entire kind of
emerging Public Health System became
convinced that it was the smell that was
that was killing everybody that was
creating these diseases that would kind
of wipe through the city every three or
four years and cholera was really the
great killer of this period it arrived
and London in 1832 and every four or
five years another epidemic would take
10,000 20,000 people and in London and
throughout the UK and so the authorities
became convinced that this this smell
was this problem we had to get rid of
the smell and so in fact they concocted
a couple of early you know kind of
founding public health interventions in
the system of the city one of which was
called the nuisances act which they got
everybody as far as they could to empty
out their cesspools
and just pour all that waste into the
river because if we get it out of the
streets it'll smell much better and oh
right we drink from the river so what
ended up happening actually is is they
ended up increasing the outbreaks of
Cholera because as we now know cholera
is actually in the water it's a
waterborne disease not something that's
in the air it's not some of you smell or
inhale it's something you ingest and so
the one of the founding moments of kind
of Public Health in the 19th century
effectively poisoned the water supply of
London much more effectively than any
modern-day bioterrorist could have ever
dreamed of doing so at this this was
kind of the state of London in 1854 and
in in the middle of all this kind of
carnage and offensive conditions and and
in the midst of all this kind of
scientific confusion about what was
actually killing people it was a very
you know talented classic 19th century
multi-disciplinarian named John Snow who
was a local doctor and in Soho in London
who had been arguing for about four or
five years that collar was in fact a
waterborne disease and had basically
convinced nobody of this the public
health authorities had largely ignored
what he had to say
and he'd made the case in a number of
papers and done a number of studies but
nothing in really kind of stuck and part
of the what's so interesting about this
story to me is is that in some ways it's
a great case study and how cultural
change happens how a good idea
eventually comes to win out over over
much worse ideas and snow labor it for a
long time with this great insight that
everybody kind of ignored and then on
one day August 28th of 1854 a young
child of five month old girl who's who's
first thing we don't know we know her
only as baby Lewis somehow contracted
cholera came down with cholera at 40
Broad Street you can't really see it in
this in this map but this is this is the
map that becomes the central kind of
focus and in the second half of my book
it's in the middle of Soho in this
working-class neighborhood this little
girl becomes sick and it turns out that
the cesspool that they still continue to
have despite the nuisances act bordered
on an extremely popular water pump local
watering hole that was well known for
the best water in all of Soho that all
the residents from Soho and the
surrounding neighborhoods would go to
and so this little girl and inverting
Lee ended up contaminating the water in
this popular pump and one of the most
terrifying outbreaks in the history of
of England erupted about two or three
days later literally 10% of the
neighborhood died in in seven days and
much more would have died if people
hadn't fled after the after the initial
kind of outbreak kind of kicked in so
it's this incredibly terrifying event
you have these scenes of entire families
dying over the course of 48 hours of
cholera alone in their one-room
apartments and their little flats just
an extraordinary terrifying scene snow
lived near there heard about the
outbreak and and this amazing kind of
act of courage went directly into the
belly of the beast because he thought an
outbreak that concentrated could
actually potentially end up convincing
people that in fact the the real menace
of cholera was was in the water supply
and not in the air he suspected an
outbreak that concentrated would
probably involve a single point source
one single thing that that everybody was
going to because it didn't have the kind
of the the traditional slower path of
kind of infections that you might expect
so he went right in there and and
started interviewing people
he eventually enlisted the the help kind
of this amazing other figure who's kind
of the other protagonists of the book
this guy Henry Whitehead it was a local
minister who was not at all a man of
science but it was incredibly socially
connected he knew everybody in the
neighborhood and he managed to track
down Whitehead did many of the cases of
people who had drunk water from the pump
who hadn't drunk water from the pump and
eventually snow made a map of the
outbreak he he found increasingly that
people who drank from the pump were
getting sick people who hadn't drank
from the pump were not getting sick and
he thought about kind of representing
that as a kind of a table of statistics
of people living in different
neighborhoods people who hadn't you know
percentages of people who hadn't but
eventually hit upon the idea that what
he needed was something that you could
see something that would take in a sense
a higher level view of all this activity
that have been happening in the
neighborhood and so he created this this
map which basically ended up
representing all the deaths in the
neighborhoods as black bars at each
address and you can see in this map the
pump right at the center of it you can
see one of the residents down the way
had about 15 people dead and it's you
the map is actually a little bit bigger
as you get further and further away from
the pump the the deaths begin to grow
less and less frequent and so you can
see this kind of something poisonous
kind of emanating out of this pump that
you could see in a glance and so with
the help of this map and with the help
of kind of more kind of evangelizing
that he did over the the next few years
and that Whitehead did eventually
actually the authorities slowly started
to come around it took much longer than
sometimes we like to think in this story
but by 1866 when the next big cholera
outbreak came to London the authorities
had been convinced in part because of
this story in part because of this map
that in fact the water was the problem
and they had already started building
the sewers in London and they
immediately went to this outbreak and
they told everybody to start boiling
their water
and that was the last time that London
has seen a cholera outbreak since so
part of this story I think well it's a
terrifying story it's a very dark story
and it's a story that continues on in
many of the developing cities of the
world it's also a story really that it's
fundamentally optimistic which is to say
that it's possible to solve these
problems if we listen to reason if we
listen to the kind of wisdom of these
kinds of maps if we listen to people
like Snow and Whitehead if we listen to
the locals who understand what's going
on in in these kinds of situations and
what it ended up doing is making the
idea of large-scale metropolitan living
a sustainable one when people were
looking at 10% of their neighborhoods
dying in the space of seven days there
was a widespread consensus that this
couldn't go on that people weren't meant
to live in cities of two and a half
million people but because of what snow
did because of this map because of the
whole series of kind of reforms that
happened in the wake of this map we now
take for granted that cities of 10
million people cities like this one are
in fact sustainable things we don't
worry that New York City is gonna
collapse in on itself quite the way that
you know Rome did and be 10% of its size
in a hundred years or 200 years and so
that in a way of the ultimate legacy of
this map it's it's a it's a map of
deaths that ended up creating a whole
new way of life the life that that we're
enjoying here today thank you very much
what if great ideas weren't cherished
what if they carried no importance
[Music]
we're held no value
there is a place where artistic vision
is protected where inspired design ideas
live on and become ultimate driving
machines
[Music]
you